chore(memory): promote strong-fit forms-and-reports drafts from memory-pipeline for review (#122)
medic/cht-agent: agent-memory/domains/forms-and-reports/issues/10180-feat10041-add-local-implementation-for-report-update.md

---
id: cht-core-10041
category: feature
domain: forms-and-reports
domainFit: strong
issueNumber: 10041
issueUrl: https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10041
title: Add local datasource implementation for updating reports in cht-datasource

> lastUpdated: '2026-08-19'

Reviewer: **nitpick (non-blocking):** The prose changed in `f73b05b` on 2026-08-25. The stamp says
2026-08-19.

```suggestion
lastUpdated: '2026-08-25'
```

summary: The cht-datasource shared library lacked a local (direct-database) implementation for updating report documents, so report updates could not be performed through the local data context. This PR adds the local update operation for reports along with unit tests.
services:
  - api
  - webapp
techStack:
  - typescript
  - couchdb
  - pouchdb
tags:
  - reports
  - report-update
  - cht-datasource
  - data-access-layer
  - local-implementation
  - crud
related_workflows: []
source_pr: medic/cht-core#10180
source_prs:
  - "medic/cht-core#10180"
  - "medic/cht-core#10200"
source_sha: 70b7be0b4f0394b22f7d24b5fd1b824fdef0aa87
distilled_at: '2026-06-22'
reviewed_by: null
reviewed_at: null
confidence: medium
entities:
  - shared-libs/cht-datasource/src/local/report.ts
  - shared-libs/cht-datasource/src/input.ts
  - shared-libs/cht-datasource/src/local/libs/doc.ts
concepts:
  - datasource abstraction layer
  - local vs remote implementation split
  - report document update
  - offline-first data access
  - data context binding
  - epic-branch provenance
related_issues: []
stale: false
---

## Provenance

> PRs #10180 and #10200 were child PRs of the `9835-…` epic branch and are stamped nowhere in cht-core's history — `git log --grep='(#10180)'` finds nothing, and `source_sha` (`70b7be0b4`) is this PR's own merge commit into that epic branch — GitHub still reports it as that PR's merge commit, but it is absent from a clone because the epic squashed it away. The work reaches master only through the epic squash `f382785be` — `feat(#9835): add cht datasource apis for creation and update of contacts and reports (#10083)`. Every path and symbol below is stated as of that squash; the per-child split between #10180 and #10200 comes from the PR descriptions, not from anything verifiable in the git history.

Reviewer: **issue (blocking):** This sentence's central claim is false, and it was also the premise for commit
`6e43e88`, which removed a true, checkable anchor claim from the Solution section. The sha
`70b7be0b4` is **not** "absent from a clone": it is present and reachable from
`origin/9835-add-cht-datasource-apis-for-creation-and-update-of-contacts-and-reports`, and
`git log --all --grep='(#10180)'` returns it. So claims *can* be verified at this draft's own
`source_sha`, and the per-child split is checkable in git history after all. Contrast with 9755, whose
anchor sha genuinely is unreachable; that one you scoped correctly this round.

```suggestion
PRs #10180 and #10200 were child PRs of the `9835-…` epic branch, so nothing on `master` is stamped with them — `git log --grep='(#10180)' origin/master` finds nothing. `source_sha` (`70b7be0b4`) is this PR's merge commit into that epic branch and is still reachable from `origin/9835-add-cht-datasource-apis-for-creation-and-update-of-contacts-and-reports`, so claims below can be checked at that commit. The work reaches master only through the epic squash `f382785be` — `feat(#9835): add cht datasource apis for creation and update of contacts and reports (#10083)`. Every path and symbol below is stated as of that squash; the per-child split between #10180 and #10200 is checkable at the child merge commits on the epic branch.
```

## Problem

The cht-datasource report module exposed read (and other) operations but had no local implementation for updating a report, meaning report documents could not be updated through the local/offline data-access path provided by the library.

## Root Cause

The local report module in cht-datasource only implemented a subset of CRUD operations — there was no `update` export on `Local.Report.v1` — so the unified datasource API was incomplete for the report entity on the local (direct-DB) code path.

## Solution

> Added `Local.Report.v1.update` to shared-libs/cht-datasource/src/local/report.ts, which persists changes to a report document via the local data context: it validates the incoming update payload (at this PR's own merge commit `70b7be0b4` that is the older `ReportInput` type from `src/input.ts`, checked by `validateReportUpdatePayload`; the `Input.v1.UpdateReportInput` name first enters `input.ts` with the epic branch's #10522 refactor `a89955a9f` and is `src/input.ts:36` on master; `input.ts` is not among the two files #10180 itself changed), loads the original report and its contact by id, asserts the read-only fields (`_rev`, `reported_date`) are unchanged and the form is still supported, then writes through `updateDoc` from src/local/libs/doc.ts. Unit tests were added alongside. Note the naming — the export is `update` inside the `Report.v1` namespace (`Local.Report.v1.update`, `Remote.Report.v1.update`), matching `Person.v1.update` and `Place.v1.update`; there is no flat `updateReport` symbol.

Reviewer: **issue (blocking):** The clause "that is the older `ReportInput` type from `src/input.ts`" is
false at `70b7be0b4`. At that commit, `update` takes `reportInput: Record<string, unknown>`
(`local/report.ts:137`). It narrows the value with `isDoc` (`:138`). `validateReportUpdatePayload`
also takes `Record<string, unknown>` (`:117-119`). The file imports `ReportInput` (`:24`) and uses
it only on the create path (`:95-107`). Your main conclusion is correct. Only the type name is
wrong. The same sentence is in the re-review request.

```suggestion
Added `Local.Report.v1.update` to shared-libs/cht-datasource/src/local/report.ts, which persists changes to a report document via the local data context: it validates the incoming update payload (at this PR's own merge commit `70b7be0b4` the payload is an untyped `Record<string, unknown>`, narrowed by `isDoc` and checked by `validateReportUpdatePayload`; `ReportInput` from `src/input.ts` is used there only on the create path; the `Input.v1.UpdateReportInput` name first enters `input.ts` with the epic branch's #10522 refactor `a89955a9f` and is `src/input.ts:36` on master; `input.ts` is not among the two files #10180 itself changed), loads the original report and its contact by id, asserts the read-only fields (`_rev`, `reported_date`) are unchanged and the form is still supported, then writes through `updateDoc` from src/local/libs/doc.ts. Unit tests were added alongside. Note the naming — the export is `update` inside the `Report.v1` namespace (`Local.Report.v1.update`, `Remote.Report.v1.update`), matching `Person.v1.update` and `Place.v1.update`; there is no flat `updateReport` symbol.
```
